[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi, it's James
here for Food Matters.
And I'm excited to be chatting
with a close friend of mine
today.
I feel like, in
many ways, our paths
have dovetailed over the years.
He had an early involvement
in a documentary
called Simply Raw, which
was raw for 30 days.
They took diabetic patients
and put them on raw food.
Later on, he's been
involved in more films
as his personal journey has
expanded into plant medicine,
plant consciousness, shamanism.
And he made an awesome film
called "Sacred Science."
and also executive producer
of the documentary series
"Remedy."
His name is Nick Polizzi.
He's also a Hay House author
of the same title, "Sacred
Science."
And today we're
going to be talking
a lot about plant medicine
and the renaissance of plants
coming back into the human
populace and helping us heal.
Nick, how are you doing?
>> Doing great.
Honor to be here.
This is going to be fun.
>> I know.
I like to start most interviews
with a little personal story,
like understanding more
about your catalyst.
How you got into understanding
that plant medicine
could heal, and sort
of kick starting
that whole journey of yours.
Where did it start for you?
>> I definitely did not start
out as a natural-type person.
I was just your typical
Northeast United States kid,
raised to be good at business.
And so I got to college and
got right into business stuff.
I was living a
pretty normal life,
eating the sad American
diet, drinking every night,
smoking cigarettes, having
fun in my early 20's when
out of nowhere I started getting
chronic migraine headaches.
They're called ocular
migraines, the type that I get.
And I think that when
people hear about headaches,
especially migraines
headaches, they
don't realize how painful they
are unless they've had them.
So it's not a normal headache.
It's like you had
too much to drink,
then you have a little bit of
a headache the next morning.
An ocular migraine
headache will end your day.
It'll take you out of
whatever you're doing.
You are now laying in bed
in the dark in a cool place
without any sounds
because everything,
every bit of stimuli
will hurt your brain.
It's just
excruciatingly painful.
And the only thing
I can liken it to
is if you've ever broken a bone
and pushed on that bone when
it's broken, that
type of shooting pain
is what a severe ocular
migraine headache is.
So I went from being
normal, having a great life,
chasing girls around, being
that young New Yorker business
guy to all of sudden I had this
really severe health condition.
And I come from a
family of nurses.
So the first thing I did
was I went to my aunt's.
And I was like, this is
happening, what do I do.
And they got me to one
of the best neurologists
in Connecticut.
And so after that I started
to go see this neurologist.
And they did MRIs, they
put me on all kinds
of prescription drugs.
And they were going at it the
contemporary medicine way.
And that's all I knew.
So I did it.
But it didn't work.
So every time I
had a migraine, I
would try one of
the new medications.
It might work once partially.
But then after that,
the next event,
I would get two each week.
So the second one
would completely
wipe out any medication
that I tried to put on it.
So it wasn't working.
I went back to the
neurologist a bunch of times.
He kept putting me on
different medications.
And ultimately I
went back one time
and I'm like, hey,
what else you got.
And he said, well, I'm out of
pharmaceuticals to handle this.
The one thing I can
give you is something
that is preventative in nature.
It is maybe going to
help you 30% chance.
But it will definitely change
your mood and your perception
of your reality a little bit.
And so even though
I in my early 20's
and didn't know anything
about alternative medicine,
that somehow was
where I drew the line.
And I was like, no,
I don't want it.
And so I walked away and
realized that modern medicine
had nothing for me.
I was getting these
excruciatingly painful
life-altering
headaches twice a week.
And I had no answers.
So out of desperation,
I started looking
into any alternative there was.
And it's funny, when you
ask an herbalist, when
you ask a functional medicine
doctor a lot of times, when you
ask anyone who is on the
alternative medicine path how
they get on it, a lot of times
they'll tell you, well, it
actually start with me.
Modern medicine failed me, and I
had no options left, and then I
realized, oh wait, there's
all these other traditions
that I've been used
for thousands of years
that I have never looked into.
And I started going
down that road.
So that's what I did.
I started going down that road.
And it turned me on to
looking into nutrition,
looking into energy
healing techniques,
and also looking into herbs.
>> So what was it that
worked for you in this?
Was it like a herbal thing?
Was it a complete diet change?
Was it a combination
of anything?
Do you think it was one
particular idea that
really turned the
tide for you on this?
>> What it came down to
was two things for me.
One was working through trauma.
In the middle of one of my
chronic migraine headaches,
a friend of mine who specializes
in a trauma healing technique,
it's an energy
healing technique.
He called me and he said,
hey, I want to try something.
I know you're
going through this.
I know it's excruciating.
Just stay on the phone with me.
And let's go through
this protocol
and see if we can
get underneath this
and see if there's anything else
going on in your psyche that
might be contributing to these.
We went through it.
And I was definitely,
definitely trying
to squash some severe
childhood trauma.
So in that moment, went from
having a really severe ocular
migraine headache to
having a normal headache.
So it took it down by
80%, which was great.
That was a step in
the right direction.
It made me realize that
there's a lot more out there.
That was better than
modern medicine had ever
done for me by far.
So I started realizing--
and this is also something
that I think a lot of
people on this path
realize once they start stepping
toward alternative medicine--
it's one distinction at a time.
You make one distinction.
You realize that there's
an improvement here,
an improvement here.
And you start getting
encouraged and digging deeper.
So digging deeper, I
started looking into my diet
and trying to figure out what
I might be eating that could
be contributing to these.
And so I started
taking out cheese
and taking out meat and taking
out gluten and all that stuff.
Nothing really
seemed to budge it
until I took out an herb that
I had been intaking probably
since I was like 16 without
realizing it was an herb
and that it was a medicine,
and that I had been taking it
every single morning
without realizing it.
And that's coffee.
So it was crazy.
It wasn't an herb
that healed me.
But it was the
understanding of herbalism
and the understanding
that we Americans for sure
are on a serious herbal medicine
that we don't even realize
has that potency.
As soon as I got off coffee,
migraines went away like that.
Never came back.
The only time I ever have
a problem with migraines
is if I get into that busy
realm of life where I'm like,
I could use a little
bit of coffee.
It's only when I drink coffee
that I'll ever get a migraine.
So we're talking
the last 10 years
of my life-- migraine-free.
It came down to
working through trauma
and understanding a
highly medicinal herb,
very alkaline
herb, that I'd been
ingesting without realizing it.
>> Wow, I mean, you can have DNA
tests done to see the half life
of caffeine in your body.
And people react
differently to that.
Laurentine cannot deal with
any stimulants whatsoever.
I joke, do you want a coffee.
She's never had coffee.
Can't have it.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>> So it was it
was that for you.
So some sort of biochemical
individuality that you
were reacting to that coffee.
Let's talk more about
this emotional technique.
What was the technique that
you were guided through?
>> So that the energy healing
technique that helped me
through the trauma
portion was EFT,
or Emotional Freedom Technique.
And my friend Nick Ortner was
the one who taught me that.
It's a technique whereby you
go through a tapping process
on different ancient Chinese
meridian points in your face
and upper torso while repeating
different affirmations that
take you into the
root of trauma.
>> What was the type of trauma
that you uncovered in this
process?
Was it something specific?
Or was it a general thing
you're working through?
>> It was crazy.
And I don't think he'd
mind me bringing it up.
But it got very specific.
So what happened with that EFT
session was I got into the pain
and started making distinctions
on what the pain actually was.
And it turned into a bunch
of different energies
that weren't really
painful inherently.
But together, there was this--
what do you even call it--
cacophony of energies that then
produced this pain feeling.
And when I started teasing
out those energies,
all of a sudden I
started getting images.
I don't if you ever
had this, but all
of a sudden like a
flash of an image
might come into your mind.
Almost like a dream
in a way, but like
some kind of an image or a
word or a sound or something
like that from your past.
And that's what happened to me.
So while I was teasing these
different threads of energy
out on top of that, I started
having these really interesting
images from my childhood.
And so all of sudden I was
taken into this one moment
with my father where something
happened that I didn't even
realize was that
traumatic, but it was.
It's interesting when
you get into trauma.
A lot of times with
trauma you think
that trauma must mean
abuse or something really,
really obvious,
like being touched
in an inappropriate way.
But a lot of times
trauma can happen
in the most subtle, subtle way.
In this situation,
I just wasn't given
a little bit of acknowledgment
or a little bit of love
that I needed.
I didn't get hit, I
didn't get yelled at.
There was a point in time
where I really needed something
and I didn't get that energy
or that acknowledgment
that I needed.
And it got me really bad.
And it's formed a scar
tissue apparently.
Not real scar tissue, but
emotional scar tissue.
And so this technique
took me right there.
And I couldn't get away from it.
It was so painful.
And I had to deal with it.
So then we tapped
on that for a while.
And as I got more
comfortable with this
and understood this
memory, the pain went away.
>> Wow, I mean, in an era where
we're becoming more au fait
with this idea that energies
can create emotional scars
in the body, you identified one.
That's a profound realization.
And to be able to use EFT
and the elimination of coffee
to work through that I
think is uniquely profound.
We were just talking
before about this,
before we started the
interview, about how
in our upbringing in a
Western developed culture
I've been referred to it in a
previous interview as a WEIRD
culture--
Western Educated
Industrialized Rich Democratic.
We live in this
developed world where
we have this association with
success and money and power.
And that it's
important to have that.
And most of our
parents have groomed
us to be little young
factories and results
of that type of upbringing.
Were you conditioned in
that way by your parents.
What was it like emotionally
growing up for you?
>> I definitely grew up in that
same WEIRD-type environment
where the ability to make
money and be self-sufficient is
the ultimate metric by which
we measure ourselves here
in the United States.
It just is.
In my opinion, it's undebatable.
Look at how we live our lives.
My parents were both
small business owners.
And they worked their butts off
to make their businesses work.
And in the meantime,
my sister and I
were left pretty
much on our own.
So after school, we came
home and we wouldn't see them
until 6:00, 6:30.
And then we go to
bed at 7:30 or 8:00.
So there's about an
hour and a half of time
hanging out with your parents.
But our parents were so wound
up from having to work so hard.
And they come home and
parent their children
that there would be
some kind of release,
whether it was using well,
using cannabis or using alcohol.
And my sister and I
sort of were on our own.
And that's what we always say,
my sister and I. We're like,
we had parents, but
they're more like siblings.
They were doing their thing.
And we had to make our own way.
And they were there if
it was an emergency.
But for the most
part, they're trying
to keep up in this WEIRD
society that we live in.
And that meant working
their butts off,
getting up really early,
going to work, coming home,
medicating in some way to
wind down and be able to go
to sleep, then waking up in the
morning and then chugging three
cups of that same herb that I
talked about before-- coffee--
to get their brain and their
heart rate going again.
And do it over again.
The quality of
life wasn't there.
And it was always
conspicuous to me.
But I was probably too young
to understand what was actually
wrong with that picture.
Something that we notice a lot
in Central and South America--
I do a lot of work in
Central and South America--
is that by our standards
these people are poor.
These people don't have
health care like we do.
They don't have
predictability in terms
of where the next meal is going
to come from a lot of the time.
They live on top of each other.
You get three or four
generations of family members
that live in the same house.
And by our WEIRD
American standards,
that sounds like a nightmare.
But when you look into
their level of happiness,
it's through the roof.
These people are so connected.
They're so happy to be.
And they're really well-adjusted
as adults and also as children.
It's really wild to me to
see that juxtaposition.
When I look at my life,
I was a latchkey kid.
We shipped our grandparents
down to Florida.
And that's a sign
of yeah, good, yeah
you're actually keeping up.
You're doing what
you should be doing.
You're successful.
That separation
of family you know
is actually a sign of wellness.
It's a sign of wealth.
It's a sign of accomplishment
in our culture.
We look at cultures that have
these generations of families
stacked on top of each
other as unfortunate.
We've been duped.
>> Multi-generational homes are
a big thing in the developing
world.
And we try to
segregate ourselves
from them, our wealth.
We've got multiple
homes, multiple condos.
We ship our old people
off into old folks homes.
So true, it's definitely
something to think about.
Can I pull back
a little bit more
just before we progress further.
When there was this
moment, tell me
a little bit more
before we get deeper
into the shamanic
Amazon journeys, which
I'm keen to go there.
Don't worry.
We'll get there.
How when you were growing up,
you had to get good grades
to get the love.
There's a lot of
conditional love,
and that potentially created
some trauma in your life.
And then we can sort of speak to
a few other things after that.
But what was that
experience like?
You spoke about how
you would come home
and that you were validated for
getting good grades at school
essentially.
That was the chief metric.
>> So when I was growing up,
there was a really interesting
period of time when it went
from feeling safe and beautiful
and warm, probably between
the ages of 0 to 5--
everything felt easy and great.
And I just felt this warmth.
I mean, I can distinctly
remember that feeling of life
is really good.
This is a great place
I was born into.
This is a great world.
When it came time to go to
kindergarten, first grade,
second grade-- very
clear, everything
got scary unpacking that through
a lot of different modalities
and types of work,
whether it's shamanism
or just straight
up talk therapy.
The culprit behind
that fear turned out
to be the expectation
of getting good grades.
So I went from being someone
who was loved and treated
well, no matter what, to
being loved and treated well
only if you get a good grade,
only if your teacher tells us
that you're behaving yourself,
only if you get on the school
bus and you don't cry.
And that had a tremendous
impact on my life.
Things went downhill
from there for a while.
And it's really interesting
the way this weird society
that we live in works,
because the only reason why
I'm a Hay House author or
making films and doing what I do
is I managed to ace a test
at the end of high school.
I mean, there's no reason I
should be going to college.
There's no reason.
If they saw my grades,
they'd be like, nope, sorry.
Not going to happen.
You'll be more of like a
gas station kind of guy.
But I aced the SAT.
And somehow, there's a
loophole in our WEIRD culture
where the 12 years of grades
is almost equal to how
you do on this one test.
It's one standardized
test, and I just
happened to do well on it.
And that's how I got
to where I am now.
It's not how I got
to where I am now,
but it's how I got
my foot in the door
and was able to then
prove myself in college.
It's so crazy.
We do the strangest things here.
But yeah, my life
changed for the worst
once I started going to school,
because the expectation that
was attached to it was immense.
And the only way
my parents really
knew how to get me to do better
in school was to withhold love.
It's something
that you and I have
been talking about
a lot, which is
this conditional love
that we've been trained
to use with our own kids.
And now that I have my own
two children, I see that.
It's very conspicuous when I say
that to my son River or my son
Rowan.
It's like, hey, do you want
to have a sleepover tonight?
Great.
That's fine, but you
better whatever it is.
Do you want to get that
shiny new skateboard?
Fine, you can have that.
Totally love to give it
to you, but only if you.
There's something
really wrong with that.
You don't see it that
much in other cultures.
I don't see it in
the other cultures
that we visit to make our
films very much at all.
It seems to be
uniquely American.
>> Made in America, right?
You're filming for an emotional
healing sort of docuseries.
I know you do a lot
of filming and work,
but we were talking
about an interesting chap
you met who works with
heroin addicts in Vancouver.
Tell me about that experience.
I found that really
fascinating in how
it relates to this discussion.
>> One of the coolest interviews
I ever did was with a gentleman
named Gabor Maté.
He works in Vancouver
with heroin addicts.
Vancouver has one
of the biggest,
if not the biggest, heroin
epidemic in North America.
And he is not only
helping them heal,
but he's trying to understand
what is causing the addiction
to begin with.
It's something in herbalism and
in traditional medicines that
fascinates me, getting
to the root cause
not just covering it
up like a Band-Aid.
So he's trying to figure out,
why are these users using?
What got them there?
And not every time, but
the large majority of times
when he asks people
about their lives,
it turns out that they have
severe abandonment issues.
And so he has a great book out
called "When the Body Says No."
And one of the
many facets of it,
one of the many
underpinnings of his work,
is this notion
that people who use
heroin are trying to get the
equivalent of their mother's
love, love that they
never got from their mom.
And people say, who use heroin,
that the feeling that you get,
that warmth that
you get when you
inject that syringe
into your arm
is something like pure love.
So it makes you wonder.
This epidemic that is happening
here in North America--
is it tied to this
conditionality of love
giving, for lack
of a better word?
>> Awesome story.
Can probably explain
a lot of the addiction
to many different substances.
People suffer from abandonment
or conditional love issues
because of this society we've
been sort of driven to create.
And now we have to
solve those problems.
But it's not really
talked about,
and I think it'll become a
bigger part of the discussion
landscape as we start
to heal from that.
Let's transition now
talking a little bit more
about your experience
traveling down into the Amazon,
meeting with shamans.
What were some of the
first trips you did like?
What have been some of your
coolest experiences down there?
What are the biggest
things you've
learned from these cultures?
>> We made a film called
"The Sacred Science,"
and it's all about
Amazonian shamanism.
We took eight patients
from around the world
who were really ill with a wide
array of diseases, from cancer
to Parkinson's to
drug addiction,
down to the middle of nowhere
on the border of Peru and Brazil
to work with shamans and
their medicines for 30 days.
And right now, there's
definitely a meme
about ayahuasca going around.
People have heard of this.
A lot of people have heard about
this Amazonian visionary plant.
And so when people
are talking to me
or asking me questions
about "The Sacred Science,"
they always assume that the
crazy healing breakthroughs
that happen in "The
Sacred Science"
happen because of
ayahuasca or that ayahuasca
was a big, big component.
And it definitely played
a role down there.
But one of the
coolest things that I
think we saw as filmmakers
down in the Amazon
was that beyond the crazy
number of medicinal plants
that they use and beyond
these amazing and mysterious
visionary potions that they use
like ayahuasca, the answer is
a lot more boring than what I
think people wanted to hear.
There is this really close
connection to nature.
Our patients that
we brought down
were all excited about all
these different rites of passage
they were going to go through.
And we had all
different kinds of walks
of life-- people who
were afraid of nature,
people who love nature.
But everybody came down
with all their devices,
and they were not
expecting what we
were going to do when they
got there, which was take away
every electronic device they
had, every book they brought,
anything else
besides their clothes
and their core needs was
taken away from them.
And they were politely
walked a mile into the jungle
and ushered into their personal
dieta hut, which is a one room
hut in the middle of
nowhere where you're going
to be by yourself for 30 days.
So people struggled
with the diet.
People struggled a little
with the ayahuasca.
But no one struggled
with anything
as much as the isolation
in a jungle hut
without your pacifiers or
your electronic devices
to help you ignore what's
going on in your psyche, what's
going on in your reality,
what's going on in your body.
So one of the coolest
things I guess
I learned down in the Amazon
was the simplicity of life.
The removal of all of
the distraction that we
have here in the Western
world and the developed world
is a huge part of
the healing process.
You can't escape yourself when
you're in the middle of nowhere
in the jungle with no one to
talk to and no news to read
and no Facebook
feed to check out.
And there's about a seven
or eight day window there
where it's agonizing for people.
I mean, it's ugly.
It's hard to watch.
You want to give
them their phone
back because taking that
phone away from somebody
seems so innocent.
I just use this to kind of do
business and call my friends.
But it's not that anymore.
It's everything now, and it's
helping us avoid ourselves.
Avoiding ourselves means
avoiding your own healing path.
>> You've spoken a little
bit in some of the interviews
I've watched around how shamans
role is to remove blocks from
healing.
Tell me about this philosophy.
What is a shaman here to do
really, and what is a shaman?
>> Yeah.
There's a shaman in the jungle.
His name is Habin.
He's a tobacco shaman,
which to a lot of people
is absolutely ludicrous.
Wait, tobacco shaman?
What, you smoke cigarettes
and you get better?
Tobacco is a sacred
plant down there,
and it's used in a
bunch of different ways.
And used medicinally,
it's extremely powerful.
When I was leaving the jungle
last time I was down there,
he and I were having
a coca ceremony.
We were chewing coca leaves.
And he said to me,
speaking in Spanish,
I don't understand
these westerners.
They come down here.
They want us to heal them
like we're a surgeon,
like we operate by
the same principles
that their weird
medicine operates by.
He's like, that's
not what we do.
They've got it all wrong.
A shaman doesn't
heal his patient.
A shaman merely
clears the blocks
that are preventing the patient
from healing themselves.
And that, to me, just changed
the way I looked at everything.
We're responsible for our own
healing journey is essentially
what that means.
And a byproduct of getting
into traditional medicine,
alternative
medicine, is that you
start realizing how much
power has been taken away
from you by the current
system of medicine
that we all find ourselves in.
It's our job.
It's our job to know ourselves.
It's our job to be
able to feel ourselves.
It's our job to be on a constant
journey of experimentation,
learning what we need
and what we don't need.
And I think that's
at the core of what
we're suffering from in
our society right now,
this disempowerment.
We've given our power away to
people who don't even know us.
>> Yeah, and people who don't
even know how to look after
their health themselves
sometimes, you know?
I remember in the
movie, one of the more
profound transformations I
think was a guy called Gary.
I forget, the Australian
guy-- was that his name,
or am I wrong?
What's the Australian guy's--
John!
So he was like an executive
at some big bank or something
in Australia, right?
He fought tooth and
nail at the start.
He's like, don't take my food
away from me or don't do this.
He had cancer, right?
And then I remember at the end,
he was like, I've seen god.
To me, he was the
transformation that
embodied the film the most.
Tell me about this guy, his
story from your perspective.
I'm just recalling the
bits that came up for me.
>> So John-- we had to select
eight patients out of 400
people who had applied.
Once he knew he was selected,
before I could even tell him
about the program,
tell him that we
were going to cover his flights,
he'd already booked everything.
He'd already figured out where
the center was going to be,
or at least semi
close to where it
was going to be so that he
knew the airports to fly into.
He was a complete outdoorsman.
He was just all over this.
He was like, I'm
going to be there.
This is amazing!
This is going to
be the best thing.
This is exactly what I need.
I'm totally cut out for this!
And he gets down there-- and
this is honestly indicative
of a lot of what we saw--
he was what somebody who on
paper looked like a perfect fit
for this.
Totally an outdoorsman.
He's already interested in diet.
He was a raw foodist.
He was a vegan that ate
mostly raw, so we were like,
OK, well he's not going to
have a problem necessarily
with the nutrition.
But when he got down
there and he realized
that there was not going
to be anyone coming
to his hut besides a
shaman twice a day who
didn't speak his language--
and when he realized that there
was no social hierarchy for him
to be able to demonstrate his
understanding of the world
and his understanding
of the healing process--
and for him to
actually be mentoring
maybe somebody else who might be
struggling, complete breakdown.
It's just a construct.
It was another ego
construct, and that was his.
And I think that's
something we saw
in almost every single patient.
They had their own
little pattern.
And for him, it was he
wanted to have the ability
to teach and to mentor and
be the guy who was noticed
for doing really well at this.
But when there was
no ability for him
to be seen by
anybody because he's
in his hut the entire time--
and there's shamans
who don't really
care about where he comes from.
They just care about what
they see in front of them.
And they're giving
him the medicine
to help him get
better, but there
is no him being able
to posture, I guess,
and showcase his knowledge.
He went through two weeks
of just absolute hell
having to be there
all by himself.
For some people, it's
the lack of a device.
For other people, it's
just the isolation itself.
Not having the ability
to peacock at all
when that's part of
your reality, for him,
was devastating.
The ayahuasca ceremonies
for him were also
really, really intense.
Some of the patients
had a really easy time
with the ayahuasca ceremonies.
It was exactly what they needed.
It was very gentle for them.
But for him-- and you can
only really postulate.
I don't know why it
was so hard for him,
but his ego was so strong.
And from my own
experiences with ayahuasca,
when I go in to a ceremony
and I've convinced myself
that I'm somebody or that
these constructs around me
are actually real--
when my ego's gotten
out of control
is when it's the hardest.
And so if I was to guess
why it was so hard for him,
I'd think it's because
he had such a strong ego.
He was the head of a
major company for a while.
He had all that, you know?
And he was coming to us
in his mid to late 60s,
trying to heal his body but
with all that patterning.
So those ayahuasca ceremonies--
watching him go through it
was painful.
It was painful to see him do it.
But he kept on going back, kept
on going back into the maloca
and doing it whenever
it was offered.
And three weeks in, I think
that when you watch the movie
you see the transformation.
He goes from being
someone who's just angry--
who's yelling at
shamans, yelling
at the aides who are coming
in to bring him his food--
yelling at them and just
being really difficult,
to all of a sudden he's
absolutely changed.
He's gone through some
kind of metamorphosis.
And then at the same time, his
PSA levels and other indicators
of prostate cancer
which he came to us with
go down back to normal levels.
So it was really, really
fascinating to watch.
>> I remember that turnaround.
I remember seeing him.
It was one of the interviews
where he was just so excited.
There was that really difficult
personality in the film, right?
And then here's I've seen God.
I know God.
I am God.
It all makes sense to me now.
It was amazing.
It was a spiritual
transformation for him,
you know?
And then for his physical
and biological markers
to improve as well along with
that spiritual transformation,
I think, is probably the
power of this type of medicine
or that whole experience
of working with shamans
and going through sort of
a plant medicine journey.
Would you say so?
>> Absolutely.
It feels like in these
older traditions,
there's much more emphasis
placed on spiritual wellness,
whatever spirit means to you.
It's different for everybody.
But just that internal world
of yours that isn't really
taken into consideration
by modern medicine
is at the heart of
all these traditions.
There's a reason why when you
go into a lot of these cultures,
there's a baseline thing
you should be doing
or that you're told to do to
clean the slate, so to speak,
spiritually-- to
get the garbage out
of there, the gobbledygook
out of your brain,
out of your heart, out
of your energy fields
before you start
working with herbs
and other different techniques.
In the Amazon, it's
ayahuasca because it
helps to dissolve
your ego so you
can be more receptive to the
subtle herbs and a whole host
of other different
visionary plants.
But in other traditions,
it could be a sweat lodge.
Sweat lodge, for me, brings
up a lot of the same things
that an ayahuasca ceremony does.
And I think the best part of the
mis-messaging around the spirit
pathway now is that you need
to go down to the Amazon,
or you need to go into
some remote culture
and have the experience with a
shaman or the high priestess.
When looking at traditions
here in America that were
here long before we got here--
things like the sweat lodge--
trigger the same stuff.
A really intense
sweat lodge can be
just as or more transformational
than an ayahuasca ceremony.
What we've noticed is
in these traditions,
the real rites of passage are
planned intensity of some kind.
So planned intensity
of heat in a sweat
lodge, planned intensity of
your entire psyche melting
down which is an
ayahuasca ceremony.
It's just, how are
you going to do
and what's going to be
triggered in your soul
when the world around
you melts away,
and you have to deal with
suffering for a while?
That's what ayahuasca is.
That's what sweat lodge is.
That's what a bunch of different
types of practices in the Far
East are.
And doing that beforehand
or in conjunction
with herbal protocols and
energy healing protocols
is what we see most.
>> To me, it sounds like
a shocking way to boom,
force you out of the constructs
of the Western world.
It's like here's
a rite of passage.
Here's a way that we need
you to sort of partake
in this activity to
sort of get you out
of your domesticated-ness,
in a way.
Would you say
that's sort of true?
And then you're more open to
receiving healing from nature,
from within, et cetera.
>> Yeah.
The shamans that I
worked with was actually
calling it a little shake up,
which is exactly what you said.
We just need a little shake
up, and then the healing
will start.
And it's funny.
You think that shamans
down in the jungle
or in Siberia or Mongolia
who do these really, really
intense ceremonies
on a regular basis
to bring patients through
it must've figured out
some way of bypassing it or
getting used to the intensity.
I've talked to shamans
before, especially
one down in the
jungle named Roman.
One night, I was
like, I don't really
want to go in to the
ceremony tonight.
It's just not my night.
I just don't want to
do it, basically saying
I don't want to suffer tonight.
I'm not interested
in suffering tonight.
And I remember
swinging in a hammock
next to him and
him saying to me,
do you think that
it's easy for me?
And I'm like, well, you've
done it 5,000 times.
Isn't it 5,000?
And he's like
yeah, give or take.
You have to figure out some
mechanisms to kind of take
a pass or get used to it.
And he's like, every time
I walk toward that maloca--
maloca is a ceremonial
temple in the jungle.
Every time I have to
go into that maloca,
I have to leave my
ego at the door.
And there's always fear.
I've just gotten
used to the fear.
>> Wow.
Before we go further afield,
away from "Sacred Science,"
we've got to cover the
thing that gets left out,
the dude that died, right?
Heavy, intense.
I've heard a little
bit about the story.
Tell me about the patients.
What happened to the
majority of them?
And then let's cover what
happened with this gentleman
that passed away.
>> Of the eight patients
we took down to the jungle,
five came back
with real results.
Two came back disappointed.
They didn't get what
they wanted health wise.
And one didn't come back at all.
So of the five patients who
got what they came down for,
we saw incredible improvement
with Parkinson's disease
which was astounding.
Of all the patients,
our patient Nikola
was the one that I had the
most reservations about just
because she was so advanced.
She could hardly talk.
She could hardly walk.
Her body was fully clenched
up when she got there.
So that was amazing to
watch, and that all happened
through a specific
plant ceremony
that she did, which we could
talk about if you want to.
And then our cancer patients--
so we had a pretty
amazing recovery
with John, who had
prostate cancer.
And we'll talk about Gary.
He's the one who
didn't make it back.
We saw pretty amazing
work with cancer.
We saw incredible
transformations
with depression, anxiety,
and drug addiction.
We saw amazing progress
with digestive disorders
like Crohn's and IBS.
And then there
were a few patients
that didn't do so well.
One of our cancer patients
didn't get the results
that she wanted.
Our breast cancer patient
didn't get the results
that she wanted.
And that's something that
we could look into and try
to unpack, but it's hard
to really understand
why something does
or doesn't work
on a spiritual or herbal level.
You just watch and see
what's in front of you
and kind of make up your
own analysis later on.
But Melinda didn't get the
results that she wanted.
One of our Crohn's
disease patients
didn't get the results
that she wanted.
An interesting thing that we saw
in the patients, even the ones
that didn't get the physical
results they wanted,
is every single one
of them said that it
was the most transformational
experience they ever had.
And on a spiritual level, they
were completely different.
And this isn't me saying it or
even the shamans noticing it.
It's them telling us as they
left, thank you so much.
This changes everything for me.
So that was the nice thing
about even the patients that
didn't get what
they wanted, seeing
this deep, spiritual
transformation.
And then there's the one
who didn't make it back.
His name is Gary.
He had neuroendocrine cancer.
And we didn't realize
this at the time
because he kept this from us.
And in kind of a
cheeky way, which
I'm really grateful
for actually,
he didn't have
much time to live.
Neuroendocrine cancer
is the real deal.
And he was on an injection
that was the only thing that
could kind of keep it under
control that's $5,000 a week,
and his insurance
wasn't covering it.
So we were his last option.
And he came down and was by far
the coolest and most easygoing,
the quickest to adapt to
that environment of any
of the patients.
Was just absolutely loving it,
loving the whole experience,
so grateful.
And making a lot of
progress in terms
of him getting down there.
He was in severe pain.
He had tumors all throughout
his intestines, and so just
moving around for him was hard.
Just any simple movement--
standing up, sitting down,
laying there--
was all pain because there was
so much pressure down there.
And after five or six days,
all that pain went away.
And he called me into
his hut one night,
and he's like, I
think it's gone.
He goes, you don't understand.
I haven't been not in discomfort
in a very, very long time.
This is incredible.
I'm not on any
kind of medication
besides the herbs
and the ceremonies,
and I don't have
any pain anymore.
So I think we have it on film.
It's actually in
the documentary.
And so I remember
going back that night
and talking to
everyone in the crew
and talking to a couple of
the shamans and being like,
I can't believe it.
I think he's all right.
I think this is actually
working for him.
And three nights later,
we were in our longhouse.
The crew has its own longhouse
in the middle of the woods.
And we were kind of just
logging footage and doing
all the things you do,
cleaning up the gear,
charging batteries,
and all that stuff.
And on the walkie-talkies
came through one of the aides.
Every night, there were two
or three different helpers
that would be walking
through the woods
because these huts
are so far apart.
And just making sure
everyone's OK and just kind of,
literally, like night walkers.
Just walking through, making
sure everyone was all right.
And there was a walkie
talkie system that we use,
and the walkie-talkie blew up.
It's like, Nick,
Roman, you need to come
to hut number eight right away.
And I was like, oh,
man, what's that?
And I remember picking it up and
saying, hey, what's going on?
They're like, you need
to come right away.
It's Gary.
And I remember my
heart just dropped.
I remember getting my boots on.
Dan, who's also part
of the film crew,
got his boots on and was just
running through the woods--
which is a kind of a dangerous
prospect in the Amazon.
Doing that at nighttime,
there's lots of snakes and stuff
like that.
So usually, you're
kind of like head lamp,
looking around, seeing.
I remember Dan and
I running as fast
as we could out the hut eight.
Met up with a couple
of the shamans, Edwin,
and one of the other medical
staff was already out there.
And Gary was just sitting on his
little porch on his dieta hut.
Everyone has a couple steps.
Sitting on the steps, and he's
just kind of breathing heavy.
He's wearing his
underwear, and there's
a few people around him.
And I'm like, hey,
what's going on, man?
And he's like, I don't know.
Still super cheery,
even in those moments.
Still just trying to kind of
see the higher path in that.
He just had that same demeanor.
And he was like, I
just can't breathe.
It's hard for me to get air.
And then literally five
breaths from when I got there,
he stopped being responsive
to what we were asking him.
And then he fell
over on the ground.
And then one of the medical
staff started giving him CPR,
and it was really,
really intense.
I hate to say it, but kind of an
amazing thing to be a part of.
We were out there with him.
He went from being with
us to not being with us.
And I remember after
he passed away,
we brought him into the hut
and put a bunch of candles
around him.
And we're just kind
of sitting there
looking at each other,
probably six or seven of us.
And there was this feeling
where it wasn't like devastation
or shock or horror
or whatever you
might associate with someone
passing suddenly like that.
We were just holding
the space, and there
was this amazing
thing that transpired
as whatever the transition was--
however you want to put it,
spiritually-- occurred
where he was there
and then he wasn't
there anymore.
And so after that happened, I
was like, what do we do now?
What happens now?
One of our patients died.
It wasn't like I didn't
think this might happen,
because we only brought down
people who were really sick.
We didn't hedge our
bets and bring down
people who had a paper
cut or something.
So I knew this might happen.
And I remember sitting
there in the hut
like, I have to call
his next of kin.
And so everyone
kind of cleared out.
Roman's like the head
shaman in the movie.
He's also one of
my best friends.
We're looking at
each other, and he's
like, I guess we have to
stay here with him tonight.
I'm like, no, you go.
I'll stay here with him.
And so it was middle
of the night--
2:00, 3:00 in the
morning-- and we
had to kind of figure out the
arrangements the next day.
But I stayed with him all night.
I remember sitting in that
dieta hut with Gary laying there
and a couple of
candles for five hours,
just kind of sitting there
thinking about stuff.
Thinking about what
was going to happen.
Thinking about who he was.
It was such an
interesting night.
It was one of the most
amazing nights of my life,
just sitting in
that hut with him.
And then the
inevitable time came
that next morning where I needed
to grab our satellite phone
and call up Susan, his sister,
tell her what happened.
And I was like, I don't
know how to do this.
I don't know how to do this.
I don't know how
to call someone--
her brother came down here, and
she's close enough with him,
clearly, that she's
his emergency contact.
I don't know how I'm
going to do this.
And I remember sitting there
for a while and saying,
you know what, all you can
do is just step forward,
just call her up,
and see what happens.
And so I called her up.
And I remember she
picked up the phone.
And she's like, hello?
And it was always like this--
she was laughing before I
even started talking to her,
laughing and crying
at the same time.
And I'm like, hi, is this Susan?
And she's like, yeah.
She's like, is he dead?
And I'm like, yeah,
he died last night.
And she's like--
she started crying.
I'm so sorry, blah, blah, blah.
And she's like, crying, crying.
And, like, I started crying.
And I'm like, you know--
we tried.
And she's like, there's
something I need to tell you.
And I'm like, what?
She's like, we all
said goodbye to him
before he came down there.
He only had like four or
five days left to live.
He didn't tell you that?
And I'm like, no, he
didn't tell me that.
And she's like, yeah, he wanted
to be with you guys so bad.
He's always wanted
to go to the Amazon.
And he just, you know--
he just felt like
this was for him,
whether he made it back or not.
And so he knew he was
being a little sneaky,
trying to make it seem like
he was better than he was.
But his whole family said
goodbye to him before he left.
So I knew he wasn't coming back.
She's like, I'm sorry that
this is a surprise to you.
And I started laughing.
Because he was the coolest guy.
And I'm like, I totally get it.
I totally get why this
guy faked his way into--
faked his way into
my healing retreat.
And so she and I started
talking about it.
And she's like, this
is all he wanted.
He wanted to come.
Once he knew you were
doing what you're doing,
he just wanted to be
down there with you.
And I know this is
how he'd want to go.
So that went from being, like, a
really heavy thing, where I was
like, how do we even do this?
Is this over?
Is the experiment over?
To being like, oh, got it,
this is all part of it.
This is all part of this
whole process, right?
To understand life, you
need to understand death.
And that was the biggest
lesson that came out of that.
>> Yeah, well, Gary--
I remember Gary, now, of course.
He was a bundle of love, man.
He was fun.
He looked like the best
guy you had on that trip.
So you did an autopsy.
And you found out
that, actually, things
had broken down, there
was massive improvement.
But that, potentially, is
what caused the death, right?
>> Mm-hmm, yeah.
So he suffered
from a thrombosis.
And they say that, with
that type of cancer,
when you start
using something that
dislodges the tumors-- which
can be a very good thing.
Obviously, it's part of it--
that a byproduct of the process
of dissolving and dislodging
the tumors that are associated
with that kind of cancer
can lead to a clot.
And that's what
happened for him.
It's funny.
As we were, you know,
taking the film around-- it
was in a bunch of
film festivals.
And at a number of
them, there'd be
rows of scientists
and doctors that
would be, you know, pretty
close to the front, watching.
And I was always waiting for
someone to kind of challenge me
on, like, the Gary part.
Because he died.
And I'm not a doctor.
None of them ever did.
In fact, the only time I ever
got an interesting response
from a scientist in the audience
was someone raise their hand.
And he said, I don't
understand this.
I think you kind
of got it wrong.
And I was like,
what do you mean?
She was like, well,
you kind of painted it
as though it didn't
work for him.
But we know that
part of the healing
process with this
kind of cancer can
be dangerous in
the exact same way
that we experienced
with Gary, that it
can lead to something like
that, an altercation like that.
So it's not that it
didn't work, necessarily.
It's just that it didn't
work for him in the way
that you thought it would.
Maybe it needed another herb.
Maybe you needed to
be used in conjunction
with a modern medicine
approach so that you
could control that part of it.
But you're making it sound
like it failed him when
it's possible that it didn't.
It was another byproduct or a
side effect of the treatment
that you saw.
>> Yeah, pretty
amazing experience.
Definitely has catapulted you
into the world of, like, plant
medicine, ayahuasca, ceremony.
And I think that's
reaching more people now
today than ever before.
I believe we're experiencing
a sort of renaissance
of plant medicine,
more people looking
towards plants to healing.
What's your experience and
take on the natural medicine
chest of the Amazon and
these sort of cultures
all around the world and how,
like, we're just beginning
to scratch the surface on that?
>> So there are, conservatively,
80,000-plus species of plants
in the jungle, the
Amazon Jungle, alone.
Of those 80,000-- and that
number continues to go up.
My ethnobotanist friends,
it seems like, every year,
they're finding more.
Even though the jungle's
being burned down,
they're finding even
more species of plants.
But of that 80,000 species of
plants, less than 3% of them
have been studied for
the medicinal value.
Of that 3%, a number
of modern medicines
have been synthesized.
3%!
Why aren't we looking
at the other 97%?
And this is true of the
world's rainforests.
25% of the most effective
cancer treatments
that we're seeing
in hospitals are
derived from rainforest plants.
So why are we not looking?
Why are we not
exploring everything
that nature has to offer?
The only practical reason
that I can see is money.
You can't patent plants.
So unless you can find something
that you can synthesize,
a constituent that can
be reproduced in a lab,
there's no money to be made.
In medicine, as we're all
starting to see-- big pharma,
I think, is a concept that just
about everyone is aware of now.
It's money.
It start with money.
It's a big business.
So until we start putting
value nature and its ability
to heal us, and
until we deemphasize
the monetary association
with health care,
I don't think we're going
to see much exploration
of the 97% of those plants.
It doesn't seem like
it's a wise business
decision for
institutions that are
bent on making as much
profit as they possibly can.
>> Well put.
Couldn't agree more.
And, you know, in
your experience
in working the shamans,
traveling in the Amazon,
and visiting these
other cultures, as well,
are there any stand-out
plants that you
see that they're using
that are just not
yet even available to us?
>> Oh, my gosh.
Our patient, Nicola, who
had Parkinson's disease,
she did a two- or
three-day ceremony,
I guess you'd call it, with a
plant called the toé, T-O-E,
with an accent mark over the
E. The scientific name is
Brugmansia grandiflora.
And it's known in the Amazon
to work with neurological
disorders like Parkinson's.
It's intense.
It's highly ceremonial in the
sense that you can't just be
toé and go about
your normal day.
It's vision-inducing.
It's psychoactive.
But the shamans in the jungle
that work with neurological
disorders swear by it for
its effect on conditions like
Parkinson's.
And watching her go
through two days of that,
and what she looked
like going in,
and what she looked like
coming up the other end,
was one of the most jaw-dropping
feats of natural medicine
that I've ever witnessed.
She was so clenched.
And she was so rigid and tremory
that she could barely talk.
You didn't understand-- it
was very hard to understand
what she was saying.
And after she had sat with
the toé shaman for two days,
seeing her walk out by herself
without the use of the cane,
seeing her doing
jumping jacks afterward,
and hearing for the first time--
I don't think any of us realized
that she had an English accent.
Because her voice had been
so clenched and tremory.
And her eloquent, amazing,
fluid speech afterward.
And just was watching
her walk around,
and be like in this new body all
of a sudden after working with
toé was humbling.
It was remarkable.
>> And that's one plant.
>> That's one plant.
It would never be legal here.
It might be legal here
soon, given the trend,
as we're seeing with
cannabis, and now
psilocybin, here in Colorado.
But it's not going to
be legal for a while.
Because it's so psychoactive.
And it's also dangerous.
I mean, I guess, part of our
distrust of nature, maybe,
as human beings, is,
you know, we sort of
survive by not eating
the wrong stuff.
And I think that we might have
this ingrained in us, like, you
know, a little bit of a
distrust, a little bit
of awareness around
just trusting
these plants in nature that
we've never experienced before.
It seems like the people who
survive the genetic lines, that
survived, are the ones
that knew how to stay away
from poisonous
foods, and how not
to stray too far away
from the fire, you know?
So wandering into the
depths of the woods
to start experimenting
with these exotic plants
that you don't know
about is almost,
from a genetic standpoint,
you know, wired into us.
No, no, no, this stuff all
over here, it might kill me,
it might give me diabetes.
But I know it's not necessarily
poisonous, you know?
It's just one plant.
But it's dangerous.
So a lot of these really,
really hyper-effective plants
in the Amazon that
we've seen, they
need to be used the right way.
They need to be prepared
in the right manner.
And the dose is
really important.
So with toé, if you use
it in the wrong dose,
you can go blind.
You can die.
You can lose your mind.
But it's not much
different than what
we're seeing with this abuse
of pharmaceutical drugs.
It's actually not
different at all.
How many drug deaths are there?
How many unintended
pharmaceutical-related deaths
are there every year?
It's just about
understanding the dose,
understanding how to
respect the plant.
And the thing that I like
the most about these plants
is that they're not just
good at covering up symptoms.
They're curative.
They actually heal you as
opposed to enabling you to live
with a health condition.
They have a curative effect.
>> That's cool, amazing, really.
You brought up cannabis.
I think it's a really
good case in point.
Because we've seen a plant
that has been essentially
under lock and key.
And it's a felony to
be caught with it.
People have been
incarcerated for using it.
And now, all of a
sudden, it's just
available medicinally
and recreationally almost
overnight.
And it is-- you know, the THC
component can cause a high,
or I guess--
I'm not sure if you'd
label it "psychoactive."
Maybe that's your forte.
And then the CBD can
be really healing.
And we've got these cannabinoid
receptors in the body.
To me, I see that plant
as an opportunity for us
to open up the sort of
floodgates of more medicine.
Because it's being brought
to the market in a way where
it's sort of regulated
a little bit more.
There's, you know-- it has to
test as free from pesticides.
And there's, you
know, companies that
are using certain
strains of plants that
have different
percentages of CBD
to THC in order to affect a
more healing sort of approach
for people.
You know, do you think that
this is leading the way?
And where do you see
herbal medicine and plant
medicine in the future?
>> Cannabis is
fascinating to me.
Because it indicates to me that
the masses are starting to say,
enough is enough.
Can only be failed by modern
medicine for so many years
until you start asking questions
about what else is out there.
I think cannabis is
definitely paving the way.
I mean, until
recently, it was not
available to be
studied in universities
because of legality issues.
But over the last few
decades, now, we're
starting to dig into it.
And we're seeing the
importance of the ECS,
or the endocannabinoid
system, and how
that controls pain, or at
least effects heavily pain,
appetite, sleep
cycles, exercise.
I think it's one of those
that is front and center.
And once people realize
the power of cannabis
and the different
constituents to heal the body,
it's going to open up
the opportunity for us
to look at all the other
plants, whether they're
psychoactive like
psilocybin and its effects
with trauma and
end-of-life issues,
or whether we're just
talking about chamomile.
I mean, there's all
kinds of plants out there
that have incredible
healing value.
And for some reason,
somewhere along the line,
we wrote them off.
>> Screw that!
Bring it back, right?
That was awesome.
Couldn't agree more.
Do you see anything on the
radar in terms of what's next
or what big herbal plan that
people are going to be doing?
Or probably even
a better question
is, how can people
introduce some
of this sort of plant medicine
sort of treasure trove
that we have into
their daily life?
I mean, how do you do it?
How do you recommend
people do it?
>> So with plants, the nice
thing about a lot of the herbs
that we use here in my house
is that they grow here.
They grow-- I mean,
there's plants
that are extremely
good for your body that
grow on your front lawn.
I have dandelions
growing on my front lawn.
It's a little-- my wife might
not want me to admit that.
But dandelions are
extremely medicinal.
We look at them as weeds.
They are extremely good
at detoxifying our liver.
They're something that's been
used for thousands of years
to help our body heal itself.
And here they are sprouting
up all over our lawns
and asking for us to
start imbibing them.
So I think that a
lot of the Arabs
that we could use and could
be the most benefit to us
grow in our yards.
They grow around us.
They grow right down the road.
You can find them
at Whole Foods.
So I like to use herbs starting
off just herbs that taste good,
that I could put my food, like
dandelion greens, you know?
You could put that into a salad.
You could put it into a soup.
It's delicious.
It's also going to help
detoxify your body.
I also love medicinal mushrooms.
And I think that those
are starting to make
a big comeback right now too--
not even comeback.
They were never even here.
So maybe they're starting
to make a big entrance
onto the world stage of what's
available, dietarily speaking,
to help not only spruce up your
meals, but also heal your body.
So we use a lot of
medicinal mushrooms.
And they also grow around here.
And most places, you'll
find some species
of medicinal mushroom
that can be harvested that
can benefit you in some way.
My friend Daniel Vitalis says
that the herbs we need most
tend to sprout up around us.
And it sounds almost
like an old-wives tale
or a nice little way
of a little myth,
and a nice way of thinking about
nature, and just a good story.
But it's really interesting.
Like I said before, dandelions
sprouting up outside my door.
They sprout up outside
everyone's door here
in the United States.
And guess what the
most toxicified culture
is in the world?
It's the United States!
Our diets are full of
toxins, pesticides.
And all sudden this
medicine that's
the most perfect
medicine that nature
has to offer us to
detoxify our system
is sprouting up everywhere,
asking us to eat it?
So in my opinion, the more
you start dancing with herbs,
the more you start understanding
the subtleties of nature
around you, the more
you start realizing
that the medicine you need
is often growing in your town
or available in your town.
You don't need to go
down to the Amazon.
You don't need to travel
into the Sahara Desert,
to some far-off oasis, to
find the medicine you need.
A lot of times, it's growing
in your neighborhood.
>> But shouldn't we just be
spraying those herbs with
Roundup?
Isn't that the best
thing to do, right?
I don't know.
That's what I see.
>> I love the word "weed."
It's so interesting
that we just kind of--
there's some plants
that are actually
really good at surviving in
really harsh conditions, which
an ethnobotanist would
tell you that some
of the most medicinal
plants are the ones that
are able to survive in
the harshest environments,
a lot of those alkaline plants.
We look for alkaloids and
plants to find out, you know,
what they're good for.
And a lot of times, the
most medicinal plants
are the most alkaline plants.
And a lot of those
plants are growing only
in harsh conditions.
So it's really
interesting to see
plants that survive our Roundup,
and survive the pesticides,
and still sprout
up all around us.
What medicine do they have?
>> That's cool.
I think, you know, that there's
that ancient term, you know,
"bitter medicine."
You know, alkaline is bitter.
Also, just the concept
that you've mused on before
is, like, everything
is medicine, right?
And I'd love you
to speak to that.
Because I think, also,
emotionally, and sort of
from a nutrition
perspective, as well,
I mean, you know, we're either
healing or harming ourselves,
and how to use the
experiences in our life
as an opportunity to heal.
What do you mean by
this concept, everything
is medicine?
>> So we tend to
go through life,
especially in our
WEIRD American culture,
with some far-off goal.
I'm going to suffer.
I'm going to do this.
I'm going to keep my head down.
And hopefully, at some point,
I'm going to have arrived.
And I think a lot of
the crises that we face,
whether it's a midlife
crisis, what have you,
is when we realize, oh,
the cavalry isn't coming.
I've been working so hard.
I've been fighting
so hard for this.
And all there is more of this.
There is no finish line.
It's the biggest myth.
That idea of a finish
line is the biggest myth
that we're told.
The idea that
everything is medicine
is a way of
re-envisioning your day
to look at everything
that happens
as an opportunity
for personal growth.
So at the core of
that philosophy
is the notion that a challenge
can be looked at either poison
or medicine.
A lot of times,
medicines are poison.
It's just a matter
of dose, right?
So everything is
medicine means that when
you get into a car accident this
morning on your way to work,
as opposed to trying
to take a pass,
and yelling at the
person in the other car,
and starting to get in your head
about the fact that, you know,
things aren't going
your way this week,
and what's your boss going to
think, you center yourself,
and you look at it as a bunch
of information that is now
surrounding you,
that is beckoning
you to rise to the
occasion, to evolve, to look
at the darknesses maybe
inside you that it triggered.
Acknowledge them.
And then move forward in the
highest way you know how to.
>> It's a way of looking at your
life not as some kind of a game
that has an end but as
this ongoing evolution.
And look at your
challenges as medicine,
not as some kind of a poison or
inconvenience that now is going
to derail your day somehow.
I guess by looking at your
day as a spiritual obstacle
course--
we go to the gym.
We kind of use weight.
We kind of use
resistance training.
And want to strengthen
a tonify our bodies.
But when it comes to
resistance in our reality,
we kind of shy away from it or
we recoil as if this is somehow
an inconvenience
that we want to learn
how to avoid at all costs.
But what if you saw
your inconvenience
as that same
resistance training?
What if you saw your screaming
two-year-old son who's
trying to get your attention
while the bank's calling you
to talk to you about the
mortgage that, you know,
you may or may not get on the
house that you really need,
what if you see that
as resistance training
as opposed to some
part of your life
that you need to just hold
your nose and get through?
That's what I mean by that
philosophy of everything
is medicine.
In that manner,
you're not looking
at this mountain you're
climbing as the only mountain.
You're just learning
how to climb better.
And you know once you
get to the top of it,
there's going to be 17 more
peaks that are staring at you.
And you get excited for them.
Because you're getting
better at learning how to be
comfortable with discomfort.
>> We've become
domesticated, really.
We've become so
conditioned to comfort
that, when any
challenge comes, we're
reaching for a prescription, or
reaching for an antidepressant.
I mean, there's statistics
showing that, you know,
22 million people are
taking antidepressants daily
in the US.
That's a significant
percentage of the population.
If we think, as a Western
culture, we've won that race,
we're pretty far
off the map, right?
>> It's so true.
It's so true.
The best thing that
have ever happened to me
have happened in the
face of challenge.
In terms of-- And I think that
that's a lot of the population.
When you think of the best
stories that you ever hear,
you know, the things
that books are made of
are steeped in challenge.
And they're people who
rose to the occasion.
And it's weird.
Because, these days, we like
to watch that on television.
But we don't want any
of it in our own life.
Where did all the heroes go?
What happened to the hero?
What happened to the
person who had some grit,
and was able to see
something challenging,
and turn their ship into the
storm, as opposed to trying
to navigate around it using
some kind of pharmaceutical
or whatever your drug
of choice might be?
Isn't it time for us to sit here
and hold space for the reality
around us, to stop shying
away from inconvenience,
from challenge, and learn
how to celebrate it?
>> That's cool.
And you think plants
can help you do that?
>> Oh, my god.
I think that there
are some definite--
I don't want to
call them shortcuts.
But there's some definite
allies in this philosophy
of everything is
medicine to make it,
I don't want to say easier,
but definitely more doable
to get started on.
One of them is using herbs.
And I like to use a category
of herbs called adaptogens
that are known to be great at
modulating stress in the body.
I eat reishi mushroom
on a regular basis.
I put it in tinctures.
I make teas out of it.
It helps me do things
that I would otherwise
be uncomfortable about doing,
like step onto a stage in front
of thousands of people
and talk about shamanism,
let's just say.
It might not feel
that comfortable.
But with the right plant
allies, as they're commonly
referred to in
different cultures,
the right plant ally will
give you a subtle advantage.
It'll help keep your system
in a state of homeostasis
even when the
environment around you
gets a little bit more intense.
So I highly recommend
starting to use herbs
and finding that right,
subtle herb for you.
For me, it's reishi mushroom.
It's another herb called
skullcap and a third herb
called ashwagandha.
They all have their
own unique qualities.
And they are perfect for
my own unique physiology.
Because there are some
things you can't get past.
You can definitely evolve
as a spirit, as a soul,
at least in my eyes.
Some things, genetically,
are just there.
So how do you use
herbs to try to right
some of the genetic expressions
that might not be helping you.
So that's what I've been
really into these days,
is I use ashwagandha
and I use skullcap.
Because it helps to quiet the
chatter in my brain and also
boost the tone, for lack of
a better word, of who I am.
So skullcap grows in the
forests along streams.
And it doesn't grow along
anywhere on the stream.
It grows along the
parts of the stream that
are the most rough, the
babbling parts, the parts that
are really, really, really,
you know, turbid, I guess,
is a good word for it.
You'll find that that's
where the skullcap will be,
sprouting up and loving it.
So herbalists look at this.
And they say, well, you
know, a lot of times
the external environment mimics
our internal environment.
So in the woods, if we're
looking at a stream,
what plants are growing
close to the most rough parts
of that stream?
And what could they
possibly be good for?
So I've had it told me by a
couple different herbalists
that the reason
why skullcap works
to quiet the mental
chatter in your brain
is closely synced up to exactly
what it's doing on that stream.
It love loves to grow right
near a lot of babbling,
a lot of extra energy happening.
And so when you
take skullcap, it
has this way of--
not pacifying you.
And it's not in any way
dulling your senses.
But it just somehow
quiets the noise.
Everybody here has a
ticker tape of thought
running across
their consciousness
behind their eyeballs
at all times.
It's something that
even the best meditators
in the world, the masters,
they know it's real.
They're not beyond it.
They've learned to accept it.
And they can turn it off.
And they can be OK with
it when it comes back on.
But it's always there.
There's always going to be some
kind of ticker tape of thought.
And so getting an advantage
on that ticker tape
through meditation, through
herbs, other practices,
I think, is a huge part of
living this life of purpose
and seeing the world
as ripe with medicine.
So the skullcap
really does a good job
of quieting that ticker tape.
And ashwagandha does sort
of a complimentary thing
of boosting the true you.
That's how it's been
told me by herbalists.
And that's a really
beautiful part of herbalism
is, you start getting
into herbalism,
there's great science to
support all this stuff.
You could find science to
support these same functions
from a medical
perspective in the brain.
But an herbalist
will also tell you,
it's more of the soul behind
that herb, which I personally
really resonate with.
So ashwagandha's really
good at supporting you.
It's good at lifting
you up without it
being a stimulant like coffee.
It's good at boosting your
tone, the who that you want
to have show up in the world.
It's good at doing that without
giving you any jittery energy.
So combining ashwagandha
with skullcap
is a really, really
nice thing to do.
Because it boosts you.
But it also kind of turns the
volume down on all the noise.
So I use that along with an
adaptogen like reishi, which
is great at modulating stress.
And it allows me
to live that life.
>> Cool stories.
I really love that
stuff, actually.
I'm glad we got there.
Because in the herbalism
world-- and I've
been sort of taught
this about Podachae,
as well, shamans will just
be walking through the woods.
They're like, why is
that tree not rotting?
OK, well, if you have a damp,
fungal sort of thing going on,
take the tree that never
rots, and it will help you
with the fungal thing.
Because it sort of
mitigates that-- like,
do you have any other examples
of cool stories about plants
that have these crazy
sort of characteristics
in the jungle that get
acknowledged and then,
all of a sudden
now, we're, like,
scientifically validating that?
>> There's a plant
called chiric sanango,
also known as the 1,000 needles.
In the jungle.
It's really, really good
for neurological disorders.
When you take it, you
feel as though there
are thousands of
needles starting
to poke into your skin.
And it's really
good at stimulating
parts of the body that
might have been damaged
by a neurological disorder.
So you see people take it.
And it's not
psychoactive, necessarily.
But it does create
sensation that could almost
be perceived as real.
If you had your
eyes closed, you'd
think that there were,
not necessarily needles
poking into you, but you'd
feel them right up against you.
And they're really great at
stimulating the nerve endings
all throughout your
body, which make
it kind of a go-to herb for
certain neurological disorders.
>> Let me think of another one.
There's a substance use in the
jungle called Sangre de Grado,
or Blood of Dragon.
And the way you get it
is by taking a machete
and chopping into
the side of the tree.
You don't kill it.
You just chop into
the side of the tree.
And then it weeps this--
it oozes what looks like blood.
When you rub it in
between your fingers,
it turns into kind of a latex
feeling, which turns out
to be extremely beneficial
for digestive disorders
like Crohn's disease,
where you have lesions
along your digestive track.
What you do is you
drink Sangre de Grado.
And it actually forms a coating
along the inside of your body.
And that latex actually starts
plugging up some of those holes
so that you don't
have that same pain
and you're not leaking
fluid into your body
cavity from your gut.
But Sangre de Grado, it's also
extremely good for your blood,
obviously.
You see that a lot in nature.
These really
deep-red plants tend
to have this association
with the blood, which
is fascinating from a doctrine
of signature's perspective.
And some people believe in this.
Some people don't.
But the doctrine of signatures,
which is that a plant looks
like what it's good for.
And it's been proven and
disproven left and right.
But a lot of times,
it's spot on, especially
with Sangre de Grado.
Really good for your blood.
Really good at plugging
up holes along your gut.
Something that fascinates
me about ayahuasca
that is one of those mysteries
that can't really be explained
is that ayahuasca
is a combination
of two different plants.
There's a vine called
the Banisteriopsis caapi.
And then there's a
plant called chacruna.
The banisteriopsis
is an MAO inhibitor,
or it contains MAO
inhibitor constituents.
And the chacruna is
a DMT-rich plant.
You combine them.
And you boil them together
for a number of hours.
And sometimes, you
put in other leaves
here and there to kind
of achieve other effects.
And then that turns into this
extremely psychoactive brew
that has been used in the
Amazon for thousands of years.
Great.
Makes sense.
Except for the fact that the
Banisteriopsis caapi vine,
it grows way over here.
And the chacruna plant
is just a little leaf.
It looks like any other
possible leaf in the jungle.
There's nothing fancy about it.
It's not bright orange with
like pyramid shapes on it.
It's just like a
normal ivy leaf.
It grows 500 to 1,000 miles
away in a different ecosystem.
How is it that these people,
these primitives, right,
these savages, you know, the way
that we might look at them from
our social studies books growing
up in high school and whatever,
how would they know to harvest
that Banisteriopsis caapi vine,
harvest this one
little leaf over here,
and brew them together, when
there's, like we said before,
80,000-plus species
of plants in between?
How did they know that?
How did they know to do that?
I have no answer.
But it's one of those mysteries.
This is really interesting.
Did these people try every
single plant combination?
There would be a lot of
deaths if they did that.
Or was there some other
deeper connection to the Earth
that we're just starting
to tap back into?
When you work with
ayahuasca in the jungle,
and you start working
with the shamans,
understanding how they do
their work, a lot of them
rely on those ceremonies to find
the next plants they're going
to use for their patients.
I've seen shamans sit in
ceremony, ayahuasca ceremony,
or San Pedro ceremony.
And they're finding in
their visions in the jungle
the plants they know a
certain person needs.
And they can't even tell
you what it's called.
They just know that's the one.
And they brew it up to
give it to the person.
The person gets better.
So what's going on there?
I mean, this is where
we get a little bit woo.
And I try really hard to stay
away from woo in my work.
Because it's kind of
inherent in shamanism.
Always try to stay with science.
But when you start seeing the
way that these cultures connect
to nature and rely
on that connection
to find cures that are,
later, scientifically
validated, what does that mean?
What piece of the
puzzle are we missing?
>> With ayahuasca in particular,
it's got a bit of a tainted
sort of PR spin.
Because people take it as an
experience or a party drug.
And not everyone
always takes it--
I mean, it's not
really a party drug.
I mean, most people drink it,
throw up, and have all sorts
of crazy experiences, right?
So it's pretty extreme.
I mean, I'm yet to try it.
You know, I'll find my right
guide, and potentially--
but for most people
I know who've
taken, incredible
experiences of unraveling
their emotional history,
finding a new authentic part
of themselves, in a way,
becoming a renunciate,
giving up the ways of the
world and focusing more
on heart-centered
way of being, like,
some radical transformations.
Let's just go a little
bit more into what
is being studied around it,
what's effective about it,
what are people using it for?
Because I know this is a sort
of area of speciality for you.
>> Right now, ayahuasca is being
looked at for its effectiveness
in treating addiction.
And what they're finding, not
from a chemical perspective,
but from an experiential
perspective,
is it's very effective.
How does that work?
How does imbibing one plant
change 10 years of addiction
to a specific substance?
The only way I can
explain it is through what
I've experienced in my
own journeys of ayahuasca,
which is that it is ego death.
And ego death sounds great
when you're in the yoga studio.
And, you know, we
talk about ego almost
like it's the worst
thing in the world.
And if you have ego,
then you're a jerk.
Ego death is horrifying
when you see it happen.
Ego death, it feels
like real death.
And ayahuasca is called
"the vine of the spirit"
or "the vine of death."
Because it brings you into
a simulated near-death
experience, a lot of the time.
A lot of times, you don't
know if you're coming back.
Even though you know
that you're supposed to,
even though you know
that everyone does,
ayahuasca doesn't kill
anybody-- you know,
there's been one or two.
But usually, there's some
other substance involved.
So talk about a safe substance.
Ayahuasca doesn't kill people.
Even though you
know that going in,
it takes the part of
your psyche away from you
that can give you
some self-soothe talk
during an experience.
So you don't have that during
a really intense ayahuasca
ceremony.
You don't have that ability
to know whether or not
you're OK or safe.
Your ego's being dissolved.
And it's really unpleasant.
But along with that ego
are a lot of patterns.
I've had ayahuasca
ceremonies that
have undone years and
years of patterning,
whether it's from
trauma in my childhood,
or whether it's patterning
just growing up in this world
and being kind of like
a chauvinistic male.
A lot of my early 20s, and
waking up the next morning,
and being like, oh,
oh, I feel a lot-- wow,
that whole part of me is gone.
I feel a lot more connected
to this feminine energy
inside of me that I've
been trying to squash down
for my entire life.
Because, as a male, we're
not supposed to show that.
So it does this amazing,
amazing healing work
on your orientation
towards yourself.
But to do that, it shatters
you on the floor for a while.
And then you spend the
backhalf of the ceremony
picking up the pieces that
actually mean something to you,
and that are important, and
leaving the rest behind.
So I can't speak to how it
works on a scientific level.
There are very few who can.
But I know from an experiential
perspective why it works
and how the healing can be
so deep that it could leave
behind years and
years of an addiction
to whatever, cigarettes,
heroin, alcohol,
or a certain type of behavior
towards a certain type
of person.
It can be gone overnight.
Because it's really
intense work.
And it's not pleasant.
And I think a lot of people
look at it like a party drug.
But you only need to
try it once to realize
what you've got yourself
into, definitely on a party.
>> What's not party about it?
I hear people throw up.
Is it painful?
Is it physically painful?
Or is it emotionally painful?
>> A really intense ayahuasca
ceremony is going to reveal all
the negative self talk that's
been a kind of running behind
the scenes for the last
month, year of your life.
You're going to see
it, but not just see
it like, oh, look at that, wow,
I probably shouldn't say that
to myself anymore, oh, man you
know I'm really not a phony,
or, man, I'm really
not unworthy,
or I'm really not some jerk
who thinks that he's somebody.
That's not how
you experience it.
You experience it by being
thrown into a Petri dish
with that one type of
thought for a while
and understanding
how damaging it is
and how uncomfortable it
can be in your entire being.
So you're experiencing
those thoughts.
As opposed to just passively
seeing them and trying
to get rid of them,
you're actually
thrown into these
different emotions,
these different feelings
of pain or discomfort
that are associated with that
negative self-talk that's
been running in the background.
So you could spend
a whole evening just
suffering, going from one,
figuring it out, clearing it,
having a moment of,
like, oh, my gosh,
thank God that's gone
now, but then getting
thrown into the next one.
And that's just
from my perspective.
And it's also what I
know from hearing a bunch
of other people's stories.
But everyone has a different
experience with it.
Some people don't have a
hard time with ayahuasca.
Sometimes, you know, it'll be
a completely different plant.
So for me, ayahuasca
is kryptonite.
I take it.
And it is going to be suffering.
But it's, I'm going to to
come out the other end,
and I'm going to feel
incredible afterward.
But when I ingest something
like San Pedro cactus,
it's like a total ally.
I feel invincible, and
supported, and amazing on it.
But I've experienced
many, many people cruise
through an ayahuasca ceremony,
but then go onto San Pedro,
and suffer immensely.
So everyone has their
own energía, right?
Every plant has its own energy.
And sometimes, that energy
is exactly what you need.
And it will bring
out all the darkness
so that you can heal yourself.
And sometimes, it's a
perfect match for you.
And you just kind
of ride with it.
You dance with it all night.
And it's enjoyable.
And down in the jungle, in
Central and South America,
plants are looked at
as having genders too.
So ayahuasca is definitely
a female energy.
And oftentimes, females just
revel in that experience.
It's completely like going
home, this idea of surrender,
which is what
ayahuasca does to us.
It brings you to your knees.
It makes you embrace
this female part of you,
this chaos energy that's in you.
And it forces you to--
as a male, I've seen mostly
men have a really hard time
with ayahuasca.
This idea of surrendering
to this divine feminine that
exists in everybody is really
hard for men a lot of the time.
And women, in those
ceremonies, I've
seen women doing
upside down yoga poses,
and just giggling, and laughing.
And they are now in their power.
Where you see men just curled
up in the fetal position,
throwing up out of every
single end, every single hole
in their body.
Whereas, the next
day, you know-- again,
the next day or two days
later, in a San Pedro ceremony
with the same group,
those women who
were having such a
good time are just
writhing on the ground
in broad daylight--
because San Pedro is done in
the middle of the day-- going
through it.
Where the men are, like,
starting to understand.
It's almost like they have this
deeper, grandfather energy.
They have this
understanding of the world.
And they're able
to move with more--
I don't know, with more rhythm,
with more pace, and deeper
connection.
So it's really interesting
to watch, you know,
what each plant medicine
brings out in each person.
And I don't think it's the
same for any one person.
>> Do you think everybody should
be trying this out at one stage
in their life?
Do you think it's like
a quarterly affair?
Or is it an annual thing?
Or is it something
that people just
go to in the dark
days of the soul
when they've got something to
heal and they really need it?
Or is it something you
have to feel called to do?
I mean, in your
experience, how do
you feel this has any sort
of reasonable practical
application in the
developed world?
>> I think everyone in the
world should be using herbs.
But I don't think that
everyone in the world
should be using
psychoactive plants.
And I think it's up to
us, knowing ourselves,
knowing what we're ready for.
It's an individual journey.
It goes back to the idea
of personal empowerment.
It's not what your doctor
tells you what to do.
It's not what the
shaman asks you to do.
It's not what your friends
think is a good idea.
But it's what you
think you're ready for.
Everyone should be using herbs.
I think that we're all
using herbs anyway.
If you're eating a salad,
you're using herbs.
I just think it's
about us going deeper
with our understanding
of herbs and learning
which herbs are our allies.
Everybody has an herbal ally.
Mine happens to be reishi,
ashwagandha, and skullcap.
But I think when people
find their perfect herb,
it's extremely empowering.
But I don't think
that people should
be going down to the jungle
to work with ayahuasca just
because.
I don't think people
should be taking
a heroic dose of
psilocybin mushrooms
just because Michael
Pollan did it in his book.
I think it's about being
cautious, making distinctions,
moving slowly.
We live in a culture
of convenience,
a culture of the quick fix.
We want results now.
We want a good time now.
We want to feel better now.
And if there's anything
that the traditional healing
path has taught me, is
that it's not about that.
It's about improvement every
single day, one step at a time,
learning how to enjoy the
process, make distinctions.
And from there, you'll be
better before you know it.
>> That's a perfect end.
I loved it.
Is there anything
that I've missed
that you want to talk about?
>> So a number of schools in
the United States are reducing
recess to 15 minutes.
And some of them are even
getting rid of recess.
At the same time, we're seeing
skyrocketing rates of ADHD.
My prescription, with my kids--
who are off the wall too.
I mean, I think kids are
off the wall to begin with--
is to get them outside
and to limit device time.
Our friends come
over to our house.
And they see we have
one little television.
And there's no
devices besides that.
And that television is never on.
They're like, how do you do it?
What do you kids do?
I'm like, it's crazy.
Actually, get ready for this.
They go outside.
And they play all day.
We got rid of that in
this culture somehow.
It became obsolete.
But is it really serving us?
>> Totally agree.
We're putting shoes on our kids.
We're locking them up.
You know, we're making
them learn things
that they don't really need.
And if they try to portray
any artistic flair or anything
outside the norm of our sort of
Victorian-era, industrialized
education system, we're
like, no, get back into line!
It's a bit of a mess, really.
>> I don't know
what it's tied into.
In fact, I think
that there's probably
a lot more-- there's darker
origins than we probably
care to even look at.
This association with being
outside, being barefoot,
working with your hands as
being somehow uncivilized,
unhuman, lower, like, what does
that really say about the way
that we view the
rest of the world?
If your kid can't play
outside, or playing outside
is somehow barbaric,
and you'd rather
have them plugged
into a device playing
some kind of shoot-em-up
video game inside, that
doesn't make any sense.
And I think that there is
this overall disconnection
from nature that's at the
heart of a lot of what
we're going through right now.
If we were more
connected to nature,
we wouldn't do a lot
of what we're doing.
We wouldn't be creating the
waste that we're creating.
We wouldn't be supporting
the brands that we support.
Because we'd be
mortified at the fact
that they were
deforested this planet.
I think that if we were
outside, barefoot--
and as we've seen with grounding
technologies, what you see
happens to your blood, what you
see happens to your brain, when
you're just putting
your feet on the soil,
or putting your feet
into pristine water,
walking in the ocean, it
does things to you chemically
that can't be denied.
And somehow, we're denying
it to our own children.
It doesn't make any sense.
It's a little wacky right now.
>> We probably wouldn't be
shooting people at the rate
we're shooting people
in this country, right?
>> We're in Colorado.
It's a little sensitive here.
Because this is where
Columbine happened.
Just last week, our
schools all got shut down
because there was
another threat in one
of the elementary schools.
And in one sense,
we're wondering,
how is this happening?
On the other side,
we have our kids
playing the most violent games
they could possibly play.
And we're also celebrating
violence in our news media.
If you read "The
New York Times"--
I mean, this isn't news anymore.
But if you read any
major periodical,
any major publication, the
headlines that you're seeing
are all about violence and sex.
I mean, we're championing it.
We're championing
violence and sex.
And we're taking away the
outlet that our children have
to sort of get rid of
a lot of this energy,
and be themselves, and
explore a natural environment,
and let their brains open up
to what's out there as opposed
to being inside and
being programmed
by all this negativity that
we see around us all the time.
It doesn't make any sense.
Being under the sun,
being in the dirt,
God forbid you
actually get a scratch,
or, you know, get some poison
ivy, or something like that,
and go through that lesson.
You know, we're not getting
any of those lessons anymore.
We're just inside while
our parents are trying
to keep up with the Joneses.
And we're wondering why
this society is so sick.
It's just time for a change.
>> Dad mode, I love it.
Right?
I'm with you.
I'm with you, man.
It's that realization
when you're
like-- when you're a filmmaker,
when you're a researcher, when
you've done
documentaries, you know,
you do a fair bit of work
researching what's going on,
who's created this
system, is it real.
And then you have kids.
And you're like,
oh, my goodness,
far out, there's been
this whole system created
to domesticate us,
either by design,
or by mistake, that has created
a modern, domesticated human
that is disconnected from its
source, disconnected from where
it came, and where it will go.
And in doing so, we've created
a sort of mass neurosis.
And we've become anxious,
depressed, unwell.
And we then go solve it
with some pharmaceutical
or some artificial, as opposed
to, like, get in the water,
go for a swim, run
outdoors, pick some herbs
growing on your back door step.
>> We were talking about
Jared Diamond before.
He's had this-- so I'm listening
to "Germs, Guns, and Steel"
right now on audiobooks.
It's just blowing my mind.
My buddy has a farm
down the roadside.
So I help him out once a
week for a couple hours.
And I listen to "Germs,
Guns, and Steel" on there.
It's such a good thing
to do at the same time.
But I'm at the end now.
But he's making
a big distinction
between domesticated and tamed.
They're different.
So there are certain animals
that can be domesticated.
And there are certain
animals that can't.
And people say, well,
how is it that Hannibal
used these elephants?
These elephants
aren't domesticatable.
And he's like, well,
they're tamable.
They're able to behave
this way if they want to.
But part of them will
never be truly domestic.
And as part of
the qualifications
for domesticatable,
the brain size
can fluctuate based on
interaction with man.
So our domesticated animals,
their ancestors in the wild
had much bigger brains.
They had much more potential.
They were much more in
touch with their senses.
And once you become
domesticated, that goes away.
So for me, reading
that, I'm like,
I don't want to be domestic.
I want to be tamed.
I'm fine with being tamed, but
having the potential to be wild
whenever I want to.
And I think that we live in
a very domesticated society.
And we're seeing that on every
level disease, intelligence,
emotional intelligence,
and ability to survive.
I don't think that we have
much longer for this planet
if we're continuing
down the same path.
We need to become
a little more wild.
>> Something that I want
to say real quickly.
When my wife, Michelle,
became pregnant
with our first son, River,
I was down in the jungle.
And I was talking to one
of the shamans down there.
I was like, I told him, I'm
like, I'm going to have a baby.
And he's like, are you ready?
And I was like, I don't know.
He's like, Nick, you know
how we talk about ayahuasca
as being pretty powerful.
The most powerful medicine on
this planet that I know of,
and I've tried just
about every medicine
that this jungle has to offer--
the most powerful medicine
on the planet is parenthood.
And I was like, oh, yeah,
yeah, yeah, yeah, I got it.
Yeah, it's cool.
I like that.
It's a nice story.
My son was born, like,
six, seven months later.
It was like a cosmic bitch slap.
Immediate lessons,
things that I had never
been able to loosen up with
any kind of plant medicine,
therapy, spiritual
practice, whatever,
were brought out into the
open when I became a dad.
For me, it was a lesson
in self forgiveness.
Because I was not as good as
I thought I was going to be.
I thought I was going
to be the best ever.
And then he's,
like, one-year-old.
And I'm like, I just kind of
got upset and yelled something.
And I'm like, oh, my god, I'm
the worst dad on the planet.
I can't believe I just got
upset and lost my cool.
This was so not OK.
And there was a part of
me, from the inside me,
that's like, wow, look at you,
look at you losing your shit.
You thought you
had it figured out.
You thought you had this
whole thing figured out.
That's really cute.
Children are medicine.
>> Bitter.
Bitter medicine.
It's tough work, man.
I totally get it.
And I find myself saying
things that I shouldn't say.
And the journey of being
a conscious parent,
and also going through your
own journey of becoming
as undomesticated, and as
wild, and as free as possible,
so that you can maintain your
nubility and your intelligence,
is a big journey.
And kudos to you
for doing your best.
>> Likewise.
>> I'm really happy
with the chat.
Thank you, Nick.
We took it many places.
We went to the jungle.
We went to parenthood.
And we spoke about
the domestication
of the human species.
So thank you for your insight.
And looking forward to
seeing what else you
discover on your journey.
Because what you've
brought to the world
has been such a gift
already through your work.
Excited for what's next.
>> Honored to be
part of this project.
I love what you do.
[MUSIC PLAYING]